BJJ Strength and Conditioning Database Specification
I. Foundational Movements (The Six Essential Categories)
These categories form the foundation of training, designed to make BJJ athletes stronger, faster, more explosive, and more durable against injury.
Movement Category
	Primary Exercises Cited (Base)
	Variations & Advanced Methods Cited
	BJJ Application & Context
	1. Squat / Leg Drive
	Barbell Squat (Back Squat), Front Squat, Split Squat, Zurcher Squat, Kettlebell Goblet Squat.
	Safety Squat Bar squat, Box Squat, Front Box Squat, Belt Squat, Rear Foot Elevated Split Squat (Bulgarian split squat).
	Builds a sturdy and strong base. Split squats increase explosiveness when changing levels for takedowns. Crucial for demanding hip flexibility.
	2. Hip Hinge / Hip Extension
	Deadlift, Barbell Hip Thrust, Kettlebell Swings.
	Trap Bar Deadlift, Deadlift from blocks/in the rack, Clean Pulls, Snatch Pulls, Clean High Pulls, Hip Thrust with resistance band or dumbbell, Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull.
	Very valuable movement pattern for the standing game, passing, and developing power to drive hips in. The Hip Thrust mimics the bridging position important for reversals, sweeps, and submissions.
	3. Upper Body Pull
	Pull-Ups (classic bodyweight), Bent-Over Rows, Seated Cable Rows, Cable Face Pulls.
	Pull-Up Variations (monkey grip, gi, towel, chin-ups, weighted, negatives/eccentric focus), Single Arm Dumbbell Row, Complex Pull-ups (with long eccentric and trunk movement).
	Upper body pulling is potentially more impactful to BJJ success than pressing strength. Rows build grip strength, back, and core, translating well to techniques requiring pulling power.
	4. Upper Body Push
	Bench Press (Barbell), Dumbbell Bench Press, Floor Press, Dips (body weight).
	Floor Press (with Swiss bar or neutral grip bar), Dumbbell Z Press, Board Press variation, Unilateral Dumbbell Bench Press with grips (for isometric hold).
	Improves strength for creating space, framing, or pushing the opponent. Floor press limits range of motion to protect shoulders.
	5. Twisting / Rotation
	Barbell Russian Twist, Medicine Ball Slams/Throws, Rotational Core Exercise (with band and medicine ball).
	Medicine Ball Rotational Rebound.
	Important for rotational movement patterns and power generation, both on the feet and on the ground.
	6. Carrying / Grip Work
	Farmer’s Walk, Rope Climbs, Dead Hang, Wrist Curls.
	Single Arm Farmer’s Walk, Plate Flips, Plate Holds/Two Plate Holds, Keg or Sandbag Front Carries, Kettlebell Front Rack Walk, Rock Climbing.
	Excellent for developing grip strength, which aids in controlling the opponent or finishing a submission. Rope climbs build the endurance needed to hold positions for an extended period.
	II. Advanced Modalities and BJJ-Specific Techniques
These exercises and concepts integrate the necessary speed, tension, and power characteristics essential for grappling performance.
Modality Type
	Exercise Examples
	Specific Instructions and Purpose
	Intensity/Frequency
	Ballistic Power
	Box Jump, Power Cleans, Snatch, Jerk, Ballistic Push Ups.
	Ballistic movements are preferred over plyometric drills because dynamic movements are far more common in BJJ. The bar must move fast, or the movement must be explosive.
	Loads of 40–60% of 1 rep max for speed adaptations.
	Isometric Training
	Dead Hang, Plate Hold/Carry, Paused Squats, Stretched Back Squat (holding position for 7 seconds).
	Isometric overload training (where muscles activate but don't change length) is great for BJJ athletes who are often held or holding positions under tension.
	Varies; long duration isometrics may be held for up to five minutes.
	Psycho Isometric Training
	Explosive Push-ups performed 40 seconds after an isometric dumbbell bench hold; Knee Jump (especially followed by hurdle hops) after an isometric squat hold.
	Uses isometric movements to shock the musculature and lead to better power output. Trains the ability to react quickly from stretched, elongated positions.
	Should only be done about once a week due to the high stress involved.
	Eccentric Overload
	Controlled lowering during pull-ups, Slow count during squats or deadlifts.
	Emphasis on the lengthening phase of movement (going "down") to improve strength, hypertrophy, and range of motion.
	Use a long eccentric count (e.g., 3 to 5 count).
	Accessory/Isolation
	Hammer Curls, Single Arm Kettlebell Shoulder Press, Plate Flips.
	Hammer curls prevent bicep-related injuries and strengthen the wrist and tendons. Plate flips enhance the ability to grab the opponent quickly.
	Varies based on program goals.
	III. Database Management and Customization